Today we'll have a discussion with Dr. John Eddy of
Denton, Texas. The date is April 7th, 1984. Today
we'll be discussing the Civil Rights Movement
during the 50s and 60s and Dr. Eddy's involvement
in the activities that went on.
Could you give a general background of your
upbringing and how you ended up getting involved
in the civil rights
movement? The sources of my involvement in the
So-called civil rights movement in the United
States in the 1960s
and 70s comes logically out of the United States
Constitution, which I studied in the public
school systems of the United States, namely in one
small high school in Great School, Howard Lake,
Minnesota.
As I pursued my work in college and graduate
school, in particular studying both science and
theology, I began to realize the roots of our
culture and Judeo-Christian heritage were
support documents for the U.S. Constitution. the
understanding that all men are held equal in the
eyes of God and supposedly in the eyes of each other
were the basis for my action and attitudes which
really helped me participate in the movement with
full understanding that neither the
Judeo-Christian heritage nor the U.S.
Constitution was being practiced in our society,
that there was a great gap between the rhetoric of
the Bible and the Constitution and the actual
practice of our people in accepting one another as
equals in the area of education, economic
opportunity,
race, and religious practice. Growing up in Power
Lake, Minnesota, when was your first contact with
peoples of another race?
Well, while our community was predominantly what
you might call Anglo-Saxon, white, and
Protestant, although there were a significant
number of Catholics,
there were things that were happening in my life
because of the fact that I lived in America, and
America was involved in the world. While I was born
in 1932 in the throes of the Depression, we had all
the mass media occurring around, and I was aware of
what was happening in the world by listening to
radio and television, which occurred during the
time I was going to school, which made us aware of a
lot of things, World War II, and then following
that, the Korean War, development of human rights
and statements in the United Nations. All of that
was occurring while I was in grade school and high
school. So these were big events in the life of
anyone who lived during that time. We had lots of
idealists in the state of Minnesota who were
primary people who helped create the United
Nations, such as Harold Stassen, who was the
youngest governor, I believe, in the history of
America, who was our youngest governor of
Minnesota, and he was a primary mover in the whole
Human Rights Movement worldwide. Hubert
Humphrey was
Mayor of Minneapolis and then Senator in the
United States Congress and the United States
Senate. And he was an advocate, early advocate of
human rights and civil rights for all people and
was with the dominant political party at that time
in America, the Democratic Party. And I would say,
and of course Harold Stassen was a Republican, so
we had both prominent political leaders in Harold
Stassen and Hubert Humphrey, supporters of civil
rights, human rights, in both America and in the
United Nations throughout the world. Of course,
in addition to that, we had other leaders, such as
George McGovern, who was in South Dakota. And of
course, we had
another senator,
In addition to that we had many other persons in our
political and religious life in Minnesota who
supported human rights and civil rights
and many of them of course were people who were my
pastors as well as my Christian friends in the
colleges that I attended, Hamlin University, St.
Cloud State University, University of
Minnesota. And of course, living only 40 miles
from Minneapolis and 60 miles from St. Paul, the
capital of Minnesota, I was aware of many of these
things. In addition to that, my father was an
active person in the politics of Minnesota, and he
knew, as a Republican, an independent
Republican, he knew Harold Stausen and Hubert
Humphrey. He was a leader in the Democratic Party.
And so through my father's contacts. I was able to
meet many of these political leaders who held
strong views on the rights of people and I think
this fact that I had this kind of background coming
from the state of Minnesota and having a family
that was interested in human and civil rights,
having a church, United Methodist Church, that
was a leader then and always has been a leader, the
tradition of John Wesley, who helped, as many
historians will say, probably helped prevent
England from having the bloody revolution that
France went through because of the many reforms
that the followers of John Wesley had in terms of
human and civil rights for the English people. is
part of this background. I go even farther back.
Some of my relatives were involved in the Magna
Carta against the king. Formation of the Magna
Carta. This is a family background and out of the
English background that I have in my life.
How did your influence in the Philippines
affect you in this area
when you
returned to the United States? Well, of course,
when I graduated from the University of Minnesota
in 1954 in landscape architecture, I was prepared
to go as a short-term voluntary missionary to set
up an agricultural, medical, educational, and
religious center in Mindanao. at the site which
was called Kitapauan. Interestingly enough,
that site, again, had some Minnesota
connections. One of the pastors of Wesley, the
church in Minneapolis, Minnesota, had helped
select the site and gotten the money for the site.
my campus minister at that time and pastor on the
campus. Wilbur Gross had invited C.L. Spotswood,
who was the director of this project, to our church
and he was recruiting people when I heard him speak
and that was why I went out
there. The, again, leadership of the United
Methodist Church that believes in equality of all
people and incidentally This church has more
ethnic group members than any other church in
America. We have the widest range of ethnics in our
United Methodist Church. We're also the first
church to have women bishops, which equality of
sex for women. They can even hold the highest
leadership in the church. All of this background
of the disintegration of
segregation in terms of race or color or sex
was my background when I went into the experience
there in the Philippines and of course there we
worked as a group of young graduates from colleges
in the United States There were six of us from
America and about 12 people from all over the
Philippines that worked. And again, it was like
experiencing a multiracial and multicultural
group of Christians who were working together on
these common problems The people were suffering
from hunger, disease, illiteracy, and also
religious problems because religion isn't
always a positive experience. Some religions
induce and convey fears and the leaders keep power
over the people in a way that would keep the people
under their reign and even keep them ill sometimes
in order to keep that power. So our ministry there
was truly a manifestation of this whole idea of
treating people equally regardless of their
background and trying to help them in developing
themselves in positive ways so that they could
help themselves and not be dependent upon any
group for particular ways that would harm them in
the future. The experience in the Philippines
helped me see that discrimination is not just in
America. It's also there in the Philippines. It's
a worldwide phenomenon. It helped me also realize
what the United Nations Charter idealistically
was trying to do and is still trying to do in trying
to see all people as people of possibility and
working towards that end in every country to help
people develop their maximum potential. help
them understand themselves and work in
relationship to other people who are different in
race, color, creed, background. It also helped me
work with vastly different religious groups,
whereas I was in a Judeo-Christian culture in the
United States up until that time, for some 22 years
now, I was working in a predominantly Islamic
culture. I was secondly working in a culture where
I was in a minority. As a white person, the majority
were of the brown race, Filipinos. And also that we
had a number of Chinese, Japanese. In other words,
we had an Asian majority. Third, I was working in a
culture that was primarily non-technological.
So again, I was a minority here. I'd been in a highly
technological society, and here was primarily
agrarian society. Fourth, the climate was
different, whereas I was in a climate that was
predominantly northern. This was a southern
equator, tropical climate. All these, without
going into further detail, it was a vast change,
and yet I saw the common threads of humanity. No
matter where we are, there are more things we have
in common amongst people than we have, because we
all had the same blood type, human blood is a common
factor, and we were all striving to survive in a
society that had a lot of, and still does, have a lot
of tragic things in its environment.
Coming back from that experience, you felt the
call to go on into the ministry? Was that, did that
experience,
was that the causal factor in your decision to go
into the ministry, or you had, had you already
decided that before you left, to go into the
ministry? Well, I had a call to go into the
ministry, if that's the term you want to use, at
least I had a commitment to serve people from about
the age of 12 on. I read a book by David Livingston,
his work in Africa, and this greatly affected my
understanding of what a person's life ought to be,
and of course there was Livingston was a 19th
century product. But then Elbridge Whiteser
is a continuation of that same philosophy in the
20th century. And these kinds of people,
extremely talented people, who were not only
people who were medical doctors but they were
musicians and they were writers and they were
activists and wanting to improve the world and at
the same time give their talents for others even
though they probably could have all been
millionaires they would have just stopped and
concentrated on the things that they had that
would have provided money showed me the kind of
witness that I think we all need to have if we're
going to have a better world and not just take from
the world but to give because we've been given so
much in the first place so that I went out with the
realization that I wanted to serve and continue
and I had the choice either go to seminary or go into
for the graduate work in agriculture. I had a
fellowship at Iowa State, or I had a fellowship at
Garrett Theological Seminary. And so I thought
that going to the seminary, I was continuing with
the same idea of serving. The other thing is, I
realized that while I'd been on the missions field
and a lot of work there had been very meaningful and
this is a good thing to do, that perhaps the biggest
mission field in the world was still yet in
America. Because I saw many of the so-called ideas
in the U.S. Constitution and in the Old Testament,
New Testament, not being practiced, and yet we
were sending missionaries all over the world, and
yet we were not giving many of our minorities and
ethnic groups in this country equal opportunity.
In other words, I saw a great gap here in hypocrisy
between what we said, you know, love thy neighbor
as thyself, and not really doing it in our own
country And so I saw a greater missing field in
America than I saw in the Philippines or anywhere
else in the world. And of course I came back and had
some cultural shock because I felt in re-entry
from the Philippines that I'd met some people in
the Philippines who were deeper Christians and
many of the people that had sent me out to the
Philippines and who I came back to. I began to
realize that Christianity, a deep religious
faith, is not the sole possession of any one
denomination or any one nation or any one person,
but it's universal and that perhaps in some
countries of the world because people are willing
to sacrifice more for their faith than maybe even
their own country, that we have much to learn from
people all over the world and not just in America.
Returning to seminary, what was the attitude in
seminary tours like? What year did you return from
the Philippines? 1954? Well, I was just there six
months. I left, graduated in May from the
University of Minnesota, and at that time the
University of Minnesota was the third largest
university in the United States, and then left
10,000 miles to the Philippines, and I was just
there from July, or June, to... January.
So I was just there six months, and January of 1955,
I got back to, and I then took a position as a youth
minister in Wilmer, Minnesota, and served that
until May, and then took a small church in Wright
County called Greenwood near Buffalo, for that
summer and then started the seminary in the fall of
1955 as a full-time student.
So what was the... So you were still in the United
States when the Brown versus the Board of
Education decision came out about doing that
concerning the separate and equal clause, the
U.S. Supreme Court.
That's what I talked to Mr. Rogers about yesterday
when he was living at that time in Virginia. What
was the attitude towards the Supreme Court
decision in the seminary as far as the church
believed in equality, but did any sort of activism
or support of the need to integrate, to create an
equality that was not separate. Was there
rumblings of that during your seminary years?
Well, there was this all during that period of time
in the seminary. There were numbers of us who would
go out to various areas in the Chicago area, where
we had as much segregation as it was anywhere in the
South, to help integrate different kinds of
situations. In particular, we saw the school
integration go more smoothly than they, of
course, were working it in the South, but we saw the
housing integration in the Chicago area to be the
area where there was the biggest problem. And so we
went out, some of us, and tried to work with some of
our seminary professors and other church leaders
and others to try to integrate public housing
along with, and of course it wasn't just housing,
it was integrating, trying to integrate the parks
and recreational areas and of course all of that
just didn't occur overnight. And that's why when
Martin Luther came on the scene in the 60s, which
was almost another ten years later, we still
didn't have all of that accomplished. And that's
why we needed further legislation. That's what
led the march to Washington. Even with all of the
Supreme Court decision, integration of schools,
it still didn't affect other areas of society,
such as housing, public accommodations, public
transportation. People were forced to sit in the
back of the bus, as the slogan or cliche goes, and
not even drink from public water fountains in
parts
of the South, and so forth. So, in Evanston, where
you lived, was there any and things like that,
having to sit at the back of the bus. Well, Evanston
was a bastion of leadership. Of course, the Royal
Consulate Churches had its meeting there about
the same time. And the leadership of the clergy and
the seminary and the seminary students was
strong, I would think that at that time that
Garrett Theological Seminary had amongst its,
and also the pastor of the local church there, or
churches in the plural, that of all communities in
America, Evanston probably was one of the
strongest communities. Again, I was fortunate to
In Minnesota,
we had the leadership of Harold Stassen, our
governor, and Hubert Humphrey, our senator.
Here, the leadership of the seminary professors,
and we had lots of older seminary students who had
been in World War II and in the Korean War, where
they had been in integrated
military outfits and where they had also been in
business industry and medicine and other
professions and they had worked as people who saw
great leadership. The other thing is a number of my
seminary professors had been in prison camps in
world war ii i think of don holter who was in the
philippines and i think of my another one
philosophy professor who was in in the singapore
region and taking courses with them and hearing
them uh expound on the faith and this this vision of
human rights, even though they had been greatly
persecuted and even almost died under the
suffering they occurred under the Japanese
during World War II. It was quite an inspiration.
And of course then we had people studying from all
over the world. Garrett was the largest Methodist
seminary at that time in the world, and again, the
Methodist Church being a leader in human rights,
civil rights, and having one of the largest
missionary programs, not just to send people to
preach the gospel, but to live the gospel, and to
train people how to live the gospel and preach the
gospel. In a comprehensive program such as I
mentioned earlier in the Philippines, It was a
real inspiration to me. It supported my feeling
that this was something I wanted to invest my life
in and to help others. So Evanston was an ideal
community, just as Minnesota had before been an
ideal state to live in as far as this kind of vision
that we're talking about, human rights, civil
rights. and practicing them and carrying them
out. So when did you begin your campus ministry at
Mankato State in Minnesota? Well, I started in
1960. I was there five years. At the end of the five
years, I had been there longer than any other
campus ministry in the state of Minnesota. During
that time, we saw the building of a building and
almost had it paid off by the time I left. I went on to
graduate school at Southern Illinois
University, following that work. During those
five years, we did many things. Again, I saw some of
the whole theme. Again, we worked with civil
rights movements in the South, myself, our
students, going to Mississippi, a number of us
doing different kinds of things, working in
colleges, working in civil rights, voter
registration. It's quite a paradox and irony.
Here we have a U.S. Constitution. A lot of people
couldn't vote. They had to pay a poll tax to vote. To
me, unbelievable and incredible that we would
claim ourselves to be a democracy and not and a
chance for our people to vote and assert their
democratic rights. And I saw this very definitely
as a hardcore democracy, and I know that some of our
people that have believed in this have been called
communists. To me, this is the worst thing in the
world that you could call a true patriot of this
country, a true democratic. And I'm not talking
about Democratic Party because it's political.
Political is not a part of it, but it's political in
a sense of the constitutional rights and the bill
of rights that I'm talking about here, true
patriotism and that kind of democracy. And so that
kind of thing we did in the campus ministry, plus we
worked in mental hospitals again. early work in
mental hospitals to make the mental hospitals
more humane along the miniature idea of caring and
sharing. And so we went into mental hospitals. Our
students, again, I worked with them to make these
mental patients feel that they were lovable and
usable and to get them out of that institutional
setting. And I think that was a real breakthrough
that I was involved in. And again, I worked in the
inner cities. inner city movement to help
revitalize our cities, to make them livable, very
important thing. And again, Indian reservations
in the rural area, again to work in ways to
revitalize the rural areas, many of the Indians
suffering from alcoholism, depression. with a
similar factor in inner city amongst a lot of
people, alcoholism, drug addiction,
depression. And so I felt during that time that I
was able to do a lot of things that are still needed
and will always be needed because of the very
nature of our society. And those things helped
formulate my present concerns and interests that
I continue in some way today.
Well, So some of your students did go on the voter
registration drives, and was there a sizable
percentage of black students at Mankato State? We
didn't have too many black students at Mankato
State, but we did have some black students,
Mexican-American students, some
Asian-American students, and we had a large
number of international students. In other
words, one doesn't need to have a particular large
American minority if there are other groups. To
give you this feeling that we need to work on this,
not just in America, but worldwide, this idea
civil rights, civil freedom, civil rights. The
fact that we took into our home international
students who felt discriminated in Mankato
because of the color of their skin and because they
were, quote, foreign, is an indication that,
again, this whole idea that our society It has a lot
of churches and synagogues and parishes. The
people haven't really gotten the message of
Jesus, who found discrimination there amongst
the people, amongst the Jewish people. The
Pharisees, the Zealots, the Sadducees were all
discriminating each other, and yet they were part
of the same religious group, which is tragic. And
then, of course, there was a great discrimination
in Jesus' time between the Samaritans and the
people, Jewish people, and, of course, others,
which indicates the total problem of prejudice
and discrimination is a broad thing. It can happen
within religious groups as well as within color
groups that are all the same color as well as
amongst people who had the same so-called
political ideology. When did—you went down to
Mississippi in the spring of 1963?
Yes, I had an opportunity to be—we arranged an
exchange between the chaplain of Rust College,
which is the oldest Methodist black college in the
United States, formed shortly after the Civil
War, 1866.
And incidentally, at the site of which there were
over 59 different battles fought between the
Confederate or Southern and the Northern or Union
forces. And the chaplain there came to Mankato. He
lived in our house. We lived in his house. I taught
the classes he taught. He taught classes that I
taught. He did the work of ministry that I did. I did
the work of ministry he did. It was that kind of
exchange, and we gained a lot, both of us, in
understanding. Here was, I was in a predominantly
black group. He was, as a white person, and he as a
predominantly black was in a
community of predominantly whites. What kind of
response did you get from black students and
teachers? Well, I received a very warm response
from the black students and faculty and local
church
From the white people in that community, they saw
us as
being a problem. We were the nigger lovers. We were
the carpetbaggers. We were the northern
renegades. We were the people who were there to
disrupt their environment.
because it meant then if the ideas that we lived and
believed came into being, that their public
facilities, public transportation, their
voting systems would be equal to all Americans.
And this was an extreme threat to their
understanding of what American democracy was all
about. preaching in his church differently, and
working with their students differently, than
working with the students in Minnesota? Well,
because Russ College did not have the highest
academic standards that Mankato State
University had, again because of black students
that had inferior educational opportunities,
The schools were
not as well integrated, you see, because this was
ten years after the Brown versus whatever Board of
Education decision. We still didn't see the
fruits of equal opportunity in education there.
And so I saw that the students just were not as well
prepared for one thing, orally or written. And on
the other hand, they had a Christian tradition
that made them kind and more caring than many of the
students in the so-called, in the predominantly
white university in Mankato. So there are
different kinds of things here because of the
limitations of education and also the emphasis of
the Southern Church on religion and as a more
encompassing part of one's life and one's family.
There was a secularization faith, at least in the
North, and I think it's even more common all over,
was evident. Had the groups at West College
attempted any sit-ins or other...? The College
was conservative, but individuals in the student
body were doing things to help create more
democratic options.
It's classed in Memphis, right? Right. Russ
College was not a center of civil rights activism.
It was probably a very average
conservative black college at that time. Now
though just a few miles away at the University of
Mississippi we had James Meredith captive in a
residence hall there and we went over there to
visit and of course army tanks were going around
the residence hall and troops were marching for
one man to go to school, to protect one man to go to
school. they had the National Guard out, with
machine guns and tanks, and it was an unbelievable
display of military power, and again, this just
blew my mind that this could happen in America, and
I thought about all the history books I'd read in
Minnesota, and all the other things, and how I
really didn't understand what was happening in my
own country, with the reaction that people had to
one man who was trying to get an education at a
public university in Mississippi. Now, of
course, as we look back on that, it seems just very
strange because the outstanding people at the
University of Mississippi are black athletes who
play on a football team, and they're proud of them
now. It's such a strange reversal. It's
unbelievable. And this is 1985. That was 1963. And
of course, in 22 years, that's a big jump from
blacks being denied an education to blacks being
recruited, going out to try to get the black
athletes so that they can have the best football
team in the country. And really, things have
changed very much, though, if you think about it,
because in those situations, the blacks are being
put upon, or used in a way. Well, I agree. I think,
again, the black athlete is being exploited, so
why? the television can project these games and
some coaches can win and get big salaries and some
professional teams can use the colleges as
feeders for their teams. Sure, I see the whole,
when you go back to the gladiator times of the
Romans and you wonder, you know, what have we done
in 2,000 years. Same kind of crass commercialism,
bloodthirsty crowds, and callous
kinds of crass commercialism again occurring
here. And the black athlete has exchanged his
status of a slave picking cotton to a robot running
down the field.
But at least his status, if he remains healthy,
doesn't get sucked into drugs and other problems,
is that he might eventually become a person who can
use his power and influence to make it make this a
better country, maybe more idealistic than
whatever. But I like to think that some of them
will give back some things and help change this.
Considering Russ Colleges and Methodist
institution-wide, what was the funding for Russ
College? Did it come from Methodists?
congregations all over the country, or is it just
parted?